Hey, Wes. Welcome to Talk Python To Me.
Thanks for having me.
Honestly, I feel like it's been a long time coming having you on the show.
You've had such a big impact in the Python space,
especially the data science side of that space.
It's high time to have you on the show, so welcome. Good to have you.
Yeah, it's great to be here.
I've been heads down a lot the last N years.
And, you know, I actually haven't been because I think a lot of my work has been more like data infrastructure and working at even a lower level than Python.
So I haven't been I haven't been as engaging as much directly with the with the Python community.
But it's so it's it's it's been great to kind of get back more involved and start catching up on all the things that people have been building.
And, yeah, so being at Posit gives me the ability to, yeah, sort of have more exposure to what's going on in people that are using Python in the real world.
Yeah, there's a ton of stuff going on at Posit that's super interesting, and we'll talk about some of that.
And, you know, sometimes it's just really fun to build, you know, and work with people building things.
And I'm sure you're enjoying that aspect of it.
For sure.
Nice. Well, before we dive into Pandas and all the things that you've been working on after that,
you know, let's just hear a quick bit about yourself for folks who don't know you.
Sure. So yeah, my name is Wes McKinney. I grew up in Akron, Ohio, mostly. And I got involved,
started getting involved in Python development around 2007, 2008. And I was working in
QuantFinance at the time, I started building a personal data analysis toolkit that turned into
the Pandas project. And then open source that in 2009, started getting involved in the Python
community. And I spent several years writing my book, Python for Data Analysis, and then working
with the broader scientific Python data science community to help enable Python to become a
mainstream programming language for doing data analysis and data science. And in the meantime,
I've become an entrepreneur. I've started some companies and have been working to
innovate and improve the computing infrastructure that powers data science tools and libraries like
Pandas. So that's led to some other projects like Apache Arrow and IBIS and some other things.
And yeah, and in recent years, I've worked on a startup, Voltron Data, which is still very much going strong and has a big team and is off to the races.
And I've had a long relationship with Posit, formerly RStudio.
And they were my home for doing aero development from 2018 to 2020.
They helped me incubate the startup that became Voltron Data.
And so I've gone back to work full time there as a software architect to help them with their Python strategy to make sort of their data science platform a delight to use for the Python user base.
I'm pretty impressed with what they're doing.
I didn't realize the connection between Voltron and Posit, but I have had Joe Chung on the show before to talk about Shiny for Python.
And I've seen him demo a few really interesting things, how it integrates into notebooks these days, some of the stuff that y'all are doing.
And yeah, it's fascinating.
Maybe give people a quick elevator pitch on that while we're on that subject.
On Shiny or on Posit in general?
Yeah, whichever you feel like.
Yeah, so Posit started out 2009 as RStudio.
And so it didn't start out intending to be a company.
JJ Lair and Joe Chang built a new IDE,
Integrated Development Environment for R,
because what was available at the time wasn't great.
And so they made that into, I think,
probably one of the best data science IDEs that's ever been built.
It's really an amazing piece of tech.
um so i started becoming a company with customers and revenue in like 2013 uh time frame and they
built a whole suite of tools to support enterprise data science teams to make open source data science
work in the real world um and uh but the company itself it's a certified b corporation has no plans
to go public or ipo it is dedicated to the mission of open source software for data science and
technical communication and basically building itself to be a hundred year company that has a
revenue generating enterprise product side and an open source side so that we the open source feeds
the kind of enterprise you know enterprise part of the business that enterprise part of the business
generates revenue to support the open source development and the goal is to be able to
sustainably do sustainably support the mission of open source data science you know for you know
hopefully the rest of our, hopefully the rest of our lives. And, it's, it's, it's an
amazing company. It's been one of the most successful companies, that, that dedicates
a large fraction of its engineering time to, open source software development. So it's,
yeah, it's been in, yeah, very impressed with the company and, you know, JJ Laird,
its founder. And, so, you know, I'm, excited to be, you know, helping it, helping
it grow and become a sustainable long-term fixture in the ecosystem.
Yes.
Yeah.
It's definitely doing cool stuff.
You know, incentives are aligned well, right?
It's not private equity or IPO.
Yeah, I think it helps.
So many people know JJ Allaire created ColdFusion, which is like the original dynamic web development
framework in the 1990s.
And that, and so he and his brother, he and his brother Jeremy and some others built a
Laircorp to commercialize ColdFusion.
And they built a successful software business that was acquired by Macromedia, which was
eventually acquired by Adobe.
But they did go public as a Laircorp during the dot-com bubble.
And JJ went on to found a couple of other successful startups.
And so I think he found himself in his late 30s in the, you know, 15 years ago or around
around age 40, around the age I am now, you know, having been very successful as an entrepreneur,
like no need to make money and looking for like a mission to spend the rest of his career on.
And that, you know, identifying data science and statistical computing as, you know, kind of an
open source in particular, like making open source for data science work, you know, was the mission
that he aligned with and something that he had been interested in earlier in his career,
but he had gotten busy with other things.
So I think it's really refreshing to work with people who are really mission-focused
and focused on making impact in the world, creating great software, empowering people,
increasing accessibility, and making most of it available for free on the internet
and not being so focused on empire building
and producing great profits for venture investors
and things like that.
So I think the goal of the company
is to provide an amazing home
for top-tier software developers
to work on this software,
to spend their careers and to build families
and to be a happy and healthy culture
for working on this type of software.
That sounds excellent.
Wow.
Very cool.
I didn't realize the history
all the way back to ColdFusion.
Speaking of history, let's jump in.
There's a possibility that people out there listening
don't know what Pandas is.
You would think it's pretty ubiquitous
and I certainly would say that it is,
especially in the data science space.
but I've, I got a bunch of listeners who listen and they say really surprising things. they'll
say stuff to me like, Michael, I've been listening for six weeks now and I'm starting to understand
some of the stuff you all are talking about. I'm like, why did you list for six weeks? You didn't
know what I was talking about. Like, that's crazy. And a lot of people use it as like language
immersion to get into the Python space. So I'm sure there's plenty of people out there who are,
you know, immersing themselves, but are pretty new. So maybe for that crew, we could introduce
up pandas it's them absolutely yeah it's it's a um data manipulation and analysis toolkit for
python so it's a python library that you install that enables you to read data files so read many
different types of data files off of disk or off of remote storage or read data out of a database
or some other remote data storage system this is tabular data so it's structured data like with
columns you can think of it like a spreadsheet or some other tabular data set and then it provides
you with this data frame object which is kind of pandas.dataframe that is the main tabular data
object and it has a ton of methods for accessing slicing grabbing subsets of the data applying
functions on it that do filtering and subsetting and selection, as well as like more analytical
operations, like things that you might do with a database system or SQL. So joins and lookups,
as well as analytical functions, like summary statistics, you know, grouping by some key and
producing summary statistics. So it's basically a Swiss army knife for doing, you know, data
manipulation, data cleaning, and supporting the data analysis workflow. But it doesn't actually
include very much as far as actual statistics or models, or if you're doing something with LLMs or
linear regression or some type of machine learning, you have to use another library. But Pandas is the
on-ramp for all of the data into your environment in Python. So when people are building some kind
application that touches data in Python.
Pandas is often like the initial like on-ramp for how data gets into Python, where you clean
up the data, you regularize it, you get it ready for analysis, and then you feed the
clean data into the downstream statistical library or data analysis library that you're
using.
That whole data wrinkling side of things, right?
Yeah, that's right.
That's right.
And so, you know, in some history, like it, so Python had arrays like matrices and what we call tensors now, multidimensional arrays going back all the way to 1995, which is pretty early history for Python.
Like the Python programming language has only been around since like 1990 or 1991, if my memory serves.
But what became NumPy in 2005, 2006 started out as numeric in 1995, and it provided numerical computing, multidimensional arrays, matrices, the kind of stuff that you might do in MATLAB.
But it was mainly focused on numerical computing and not with the type of business data sets that you find in database systems, which contain a lot of strings or dates or non-numeric data.
And so my initial interest was I found Python to be a really productive programming language.
I really liked writing code in it, writing simple scripts, like, you know, doing random things, you know, for my job.
And you had this numerical computing library, NumPy, which enabled you to work with large numeric arrays and large, you know, data sets with a single data type.
But working with this more tabular type data, stuff that you would do in Excel or stuff that you do in a database, it wasn't very easy to do that with NumPy or it wasn't really designed for that.
And so that's what led to building this like higher level library that deals with these tabular data sets in the Pandas library, which was originally focused on, you know, building really with a really close relationship with NumPy.
So Pandas itself was like a thin layer on top of NumPy originally.
One thing I find interesting about pandas is it's almost its own programming environment these days in the sense that, you know, traditional Python, we do a lot of loops.
We do a lot of attribute dereferencing, function calling.
And a lot of what happens in pandas is more functional.
It's more applied to us.
It's almost like set operations, right?
And a lot of vector operations and so on.
Yeah, and that was inherited.
That was behaviors inherited from NumPy.
So NumPy is very array-oriented, vector-oriented.
So rather than write a for loop, you would write an array expression, which would operate on whole batches of data in a single function call,
which is a lot faster because you can drop down into C code and get good performance that way.
And so Pandas adopted the NumPy way of the NumPy-like array expression or vector operations.
But it's true that that's extended to the types of non-numeric data operations that you can do in Pandas,
like vectorized set lookups where you can say like, you would say like,
oh, I have this array of strings
and I have this subset of strings
and I want to compute a Boolean array
which says whether or not each string
is contained in this set of strings.
And so in pandas, that's the isin function.
So you would say like, you know,
column A like isin some set of substrings
and that produces that single function call
produces a whole Boolean array
that you can use for subsetting later on.
Yeah, there's a ton of thing.
things that are really interesting in there. One of the challenges, maybe you could speak to this a
little bit, then I want to come back to your performance comment. One of the challenges,
I think, is that some of these operations are not super obvious that they exist or that they're
discoverable, right? Like instead of just indexing into, say, a column, you can index on an expression
that might filter out the columns or project them or things like that. How do you recommend people
kind of discover a little bigger breadth of what they can do?
I mean, there's plenty of, I mean, I think there's great books written about pandas.
So there's my book, Python for Datasis.
I think Matt Harrison has written an excellent book, Effective Pandas.
The pandas documentation, I think, provides really nitty gritty detail about how all the
different things work.
But when I was writing this book, Python for Data Analysis, my goal was to provide a primer, like a tutorial on how to solve data problems with pandas.
And so for that, I had to introduce some basics of how NumPy works.
So people array oriented computing, basics of Python.
So you know enough Python to be able to understand what things that pandas is doing.
um but the um yeah kind of it builds incrementally and so like as you go through the book the content
gets um you know gets more and more advanced it introduces it built you learn you master an initial
set of techniques and then you can start learning about more advanced techniques
so it's definitely a pedagogical you know pedagogical resource and it is now freely as you
as you're showing there on the screen, it is freely available, on the internet. So,
JJ Lair, helped me port the book to use Quarto, which is a new, technical publishing system
for writing books and blogs and, and a website, you know, corto.org. and, there it is.
And, yeah, so that's how I was able to publish, my book, on, on the internet as,
essentially you can use Quarto to write books using notebooks, which is cool.
My book was written a long time ago in O'Reilly's DocXML, so not particularly fun to edit.
But yeah, because Quarto is built on Pandoc, which is a sort of markup language transpilation system.
So you can use Pandoc to convert documents from one format to another.
And so that's the kind of the root framework that Quarto is built on for, you know, generating, starting with one document format and generating many different types of output formats.
That's cool. I didn't realize your book was available just to read on the Internet.
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah. So in the third edition, I was able to negotiate with O'Reilly and make an amendment to my very old book.
old book contract from 2011 to let me release the, release the book for free, on my website. So
it's, yeah, it's just available there at westmckinney.com slash book. I find that like a lot of people
really like the print book. And so, I think that having the online book just available,
like whenever you are somewhere and you want to look something up is, is great. but,
yeah, I've been, I thought I had to search. Yeah, that's true. That's true. Yeah. And like,
if you go to the search bar and if you go back to the book and just look at the search bar,
you know, look at just search for like group by like, you know, all one word or, you know,
yeah, it's like, it comes up really fast. You can go to that section and it's, it's, it's pretty
cool. I thought that releasing the book for free online would, would affect sales, but now people
just really like having paper books. It seems even in 2024. Yeah. Even digital books are nice. You
I think it's about taking the notes.
Where do I put my highlights and how do I remember it?
That's right.
Yeah, stuff like that.
This quarter thing looks super interesting.
If you look at Pandoc,
if people haven't looked at this before,
the conversion matrix,
I don't know how you would,
how would you describe this, Wes?
Busy?
Complete?
What is this?
This is crazy.
It's very busy, yeah.
It can convert from, it looks like about 30 or 40 input formats to 50 or 60 output formats,
maybe more than that.
It's kind of my just eyeballing it.
But yeah, it's pretty impressive.
And then if you took the combinatorial of how many different ways could you combine the
30 to the 50, it's kind of what it looks like.
It's truly amazing.
So if you've got Markdown, you want to turn it into a PDF, or you've got a Doku wiki and
turn it into an ePub or whatever right or even like reveal js probably to powerpoint i would
imagine i don't know yeah yeah well as as history like backstory about about quarto so you know it
helps to keep in mind that that jj created cold fusion which was this uh you know essentially
publishing system early publishing system for um for the internet um similar to cgi and and php
and other dynamic web publishing systems.
And so early on at RStudio,
they created R Markdown,
which is basically extensions to Markdown
that allow you to have code cells written in R.
And then eventually they added support
for some other languages
where it's kind of like a Jupyter notebook
in the sense that you could have some Markdown
and some code and some plots and output.
And you would run the R Markdown renderer
and it would generate all the output
and insert it into the document.
And so you could use that to write blogs
and websites and everything.
But R Markdown was written in R,
and so that limited, in a sense,
it made it harder to install
because you would have to install R to use it.
And also people in association with R
that perhaps was unmerited.
And so in the meantime,
you know, with everything that's happened with web technology,
there's, it's now very easy to put a complete JavaScript engine
in a small install footprint, you know, on a machine with no dependencies
and to be able to run a system that is, you know, written in,
a system that's written in JavaScript.
And so Quarto is completely language agnostic.
It's written in TypeScripts and it uses Pandoc as an underlying engine.
And it's very easy to install.
And so it addresses some of the portability and, you know, extensive that were in our
markdown.
But as a result, you know, I think the Posit team had a lot of just has more than, you
know, a decade or if you include ColdFusion, you know, more than 25 years of experience
in building really developer-friendly technical publishing tools.
And so I think that it's not data science, but it's something that is an important part of the data science workflow, which is how do you make your analysis and your work available for consumption in different forms?
And so having this system that can publish outputs in many different places is super valuable.
And so a lot of people start out in Jupyter Notebooks, but there's many different possible
input formats.
And so to be able to use the same source to publish to a website or to a Confluence page
or to a PDF is super valuable.
Yeah, it's super interesting.
Okay.
Something I got to explore some more.
All right, let's go back to Pandas for a minute.
First, how about some kind words from the audience for you?
Ravit says, Wes, your work has changed my life.
which is very nice.
I'm happy to hear it.
But yeah, I'm more than happy to talk in depth about Pandas.
And I think the history of the project is interesting.
And I think also how the project has developed in the intervening 15, 16 years is pretty interesting as well.
Yeah.
Let's talk derivatives for a minute.
So growth and speed of adoption and all those things.
When you first started working on this and you first put it out,
did you foresee a world where this was so popular and so important?
Did you think of, yeah, pretty soon, black holes.
I'm pretty sure I'll be part of that somehow.
I mean, it was always the aspiration.
There was the aspiration there of making Python this mainstream language for statistical computing and data analysis.
It didn't occur to me that it would become this popular or that it would become one of the main tools that people use for working with data in a business setting.
that, you know, it would have been, if that was the aspiration or if that was, you know,
what I needed to achieve to be satisfied, that that would have been completely unreasonable.
And I also don't think that, you know, in a certain sense, like, I don't know that its popularity,
you know, it is deserved and it's deserved. Like, I think there's many other worthy efforts that
have been created over the years that have been, you know, really great work that others have
have done in this, in this domain. And so the fact that, that pandas caught on and became
as popular as it is, I think it's a combination of timing and, you know, there was like a developer
relations aspect that there was content available. And like, I wrote my book and that made it easier
for people to learn how to use the project. but also like we, we had a serendipitous,
um, open source developer community that came together, that the project to, you know,
grow and expand like really rapidly in the, in the early 2010s. And, you know, and I, I,
yeah, I definitely spent a lot of work, like recruiting people to, to work on the project and,
uh, encouraging, you know, others to work on it. Cause sometimes people create open source projects
and then it's hard for, hard for others to get involved and get a seat at the table, so to speak.
but I was very keen to, bring on others and to, give them responsibility and, you
ultimately hand over the reins to the project to others.
And I've spoken a lot about that over the years,
how important that is for open source project creators
to make room for others in growing the project
so that they can become owners of it as well.
It's tough to make space and tough to bring on folks.
Have you heard of the Django Nuts?
Djangonauts I think it's Djangonauts.space they have an awesome domain but it's basically like
kind of like a boot camp but it's for taking people who just like Django and turn them into
actually contributors or core contributors do you guys have what's your onboarding story for
people who do want to participate um I I'm embarrassed to say that I'm not uh I'm not
I don't have a comprehensive view of like all of the different you know community outreach
channels that the pandas project has done to help uh grow new contributors um so one of the
core team members um Mark Garcia has done like an amazing job organizing um documentation sprints
and other like contributor um sourcing events essentially creating very very friendly accessible
events where people who are interested in getting involved in pandas can meet each other and then
assist each other in making their first pull request and it could be something as simple as
you know making a small improvement to the to the pandas documentation because it's such a large
project the documentation is like always something that could be um that could be made
better you know either adding more adding more examples or documenting things that aren't
documented um or making yeah just just making the documentation better and so it's something that
for new contributors is more accessible than working on the internals of like one of the you
know algorithms or something and and uh or like working on some significant performance improvement
might be a bit intimidating if you've never worked on the pandas code base and it's a pretty large
code base because it's been it's been worked on continuously for you know for like going on 20
years. So it's, yeah, it can be,
takes a while to really get to a place where you can be productive and that can
be discouraging for new contributors,
especially those who don't have a lot of open source experience.
That's one of the ironies of challenges of these big projects is they're just so
finely polished. So many people are using them.
Every edge case matters to somebody, right?
And so to become a contributor and make changes to that, it takes a while,
I'm sure.
Yeah. Yeah. I mean, I think it's definitely a big thing that helped is allowing people to get paid to work on Pandas or to be able to contribute to Pandas as part of their job description, like as maybe part of their job is maintaining Pandas.
So Anaconda, you know, was like, you know, one of the earliest companies who had engineers on staff, you know, like, yeah, like, you know, Brock Mendel, Tom Augsberger, Jeff Reback, who part of their job was maintaining and developing Pandas.
And that was huge because prior to that, the project was purely based on volunteers.
Like I was a volunteer and everyone was working on the project as a passion project in their free time.
And then Travis Oliphant, one of the founders, he and Peter Wang founded Anaconda.
Travis spun out from Anaconda to create Quansight and has continued to sponsor development in and around Pandas.
And that's enabled people like Mark to do these community building events and for it to not be something that's totally uncompensated.
Yeah, that's a lot of stuff going on.
And I think the commercial interest is awesome, right?
I mean, there's just a different level of problems I feel like you could take on.
I got this entire week and that's my job
to make this work rather than I've got two hours
and I can't really take on a huge project
so I'll work on the smaller improvements or whatever.
I think many people know
but I haven't been involved day to day in Pandas since 2013
so that's getting on.
That's a lot of years.
I still talk to the Pandas contributors.
We had a Pandas meetup, core developer meetup here in Nashville pre-COVID.
I think it was in 2019, maybe.
So I'm still in active contact with the Pandas developers, but it's been a different team of people leading the project.
It's taken on a life of its own, which is amazing.
That's exactly, as a project creator, that's exactly what you want.
is to not be beholden to the project that you created and forced and, you know, kind of,
you know, have to, you know, be responsible for it and take care of it for the rest of your life.
But if you look at like a lot of the community, a lot of the most kind of intensive community
development has happened since, like, since I moved on to work on other projects. And so now
the project is, I don't know the exact count, but it's had thousands of contributors. And so,
you know, to have thousands of different unique individuals contributing to an open source project
is, it's a big deal. So I think even, I don't know what it says on the bottom of GitHub,
it says, you know, 30, 300, 200 contributors, but that's maybe not even the full story because
sometimes, you know, people, you know, they don't have their email address associated with their
GitHub profile and, you know, how GitHub counts contributors. I would say probably the true number
is closer to 4,000.
So that's, yeah, but I think that's a testament
to the core team and all the outreach that they've done
and making the project accessible
and easy to contribute to.
Because if you go and try to make a pull request
to a project, and there's many different ways
that you can fail.
So either the project is technically,
there's issues with the build system
or the developer tooling.
And so you struggle with the developer tooling.
And so if you aren't working on it every day and every night, you can't make heads or tails
of how the developer tools work.
But then there's also the level of accessibility of the core development team.
If they aren't there to support you in getting involved in the project and learning how it
works and creating documentation tribute and what's expected of you, that can also be a
source of frustration where people churn out of the project, you know, because it's just,
it's too hard to find their sea legs. And maybe, and maybe also, you know, sometimes development
teams are unfriendly or unhelpful, or, you know, they make, they make others feel like,
they make others feel like they're annoyed with them or like they're wasting their time or
something. It's like, I don't want to look at your, you know, this pull request and give you
feedback because you know i could do it more quickly by myself or something like sometimes
you see that in open source projects yeah yeah um but they've they've created a very like they've
they've created a very welcoming uh very welcoming uh environment and uh yeah i think the the
contribution numbers speak speak for themselves they definitely do maybe the last thing before we
move on to the other stuff you're working on but the other interesting GitHub statistic here is the
used by 1.6 million projects that's i don't know if i've ever seen it used by that high there's
probably some that are higher but not many yeah it's um yeah it's it's it's a lot of projects um
i think it's it's it's it's interesting i think um it's it's like many projects it's reached a point
where it's an essential and assumed part of many people's toolkit.
Like the first thing that they write at the top of a file
that they're working on is import Pandas as PD
or import NumPy as PD.
And so it's, yeah, I think to create,
I think in a sense,
I think one of the reasons why Pandas has gotten so popular
is that it is beneficial to the community,
to the Python community,
to have fewer solutions.
Kind of the zen of Python,
there should be one
and preferably only one obvious way to do things.
And so if there were 10 different Pandas-like projects,
that creates skill portability problems.
And it's just easier if everyone says,
oh, we just, Pandas is the thing that we use,
change jobs and you can take all your skills like how to use pandas with you and i think that's also
one of the reasons why python has become so successful in the business world is because
you can teach somebody even without a lot of programming experience how to use python
how to use pandas and become productive doing doing you know basic work very very quickly and so
So, you know, one of the solutions I remember back in the early 2010s, there were a lot of articles and talks about how to address the data science shortage.
And my belief, and I gave a talk at Web Summit in Dublin in 2000, gosh, maybe 2017, I have to look exactly.
But basically it was the data scientist shortage.
And my thesis was always, we should make it easier to be a data scientist or lower the
bar for what sort of skills you have to master before you can do productive work in a business
setting.
And so I think the fact that there is just pandas and that's the one thing that people
have to learn how to use is their essential starting point for doing any data has also
led to this piling on of like people being motivated to make this one thing better
because it you know you make improvements to pandas and they benefit millions of projects
and millions of people around the world and that's uh yeah so it's like a you know steady
snowballing effect i agree with you and i think that i think doing data science is getting easier
we've got a lot of interesting frameworks and tools um shatter python one of them right that
makes it easier to share and run run your code you know yeah so yeah i think the um uh yeah shiny
shiny for python uh streamlet you know dash like these different um interactive data application
publishing frameworks so you can go from you know a few few lines of pandas code loading some data
and doing some analysis and visualization to pushing that as an interactive interactive website
without having to know how to use any web development frameworks
or Node.js or anything like that.
And so to be able to get up and running
and build a working interactive web application
that's powered by Python,
yeah, it's a game changer in terms of shortening
end-to-end development life cycles.
What do you think about JupyterLite
and these um pyoxidite and basically jupiter jupiter in the browser yeah of things yeah um
WebAssembly and all that yeah so i i uh definitely very um excited about i've been following web
assembly in general and so i guess uh some people listening will know about know about web
assembly um but but basically it's a portable machine code um that can be compiled and executed
in within your browser in a sandbox environment so it protects against security issues and um
allows prevents like the person who wrote the WebAssembly code from doing something malicious
on your on your machine which is very important um won't necessarily stop them from like you know
mining cryptocurrency while you have the browser tab open that's a whole separate problem
So, but yeah, I think it's enabled us to, you know, run the whole scientific Python stack, including Jupyter and NumPy and Pandas totally in the browser without, you know, having a client and server and needing to, you know, run a container someplace in the cloud.
And so I think in terms of creating application deployment, so like being able to deploy an interactive data application, like with Shiny, for example, without needing to have a server, that's actually pretty amazing.
And so I think that, you know, simplifies and opens up new use cases, like new, you know, application architectures and makes things a lot for, because setting up and running a server creates brittleness, like it has cost.
And so if the browser is doubling as your server process, I think that's really cool.
You also have other projects like DuckDB, which is a high-performance, embeddable, analytic
SQL engine.
And so now with DuckDB compiled to WASM, you can get a high-performance database running
in your browser.
And so you can get low latency interactive queries and interactive dashboards.
And so it's, yeah, WebAssembly has opened up this whole kind of new world of possibilities.
And so it's transformative, I think.
I think for Python in particular, you mentioned Pyodide, which is kind of a whole package stack.
So it's like a framework for build and build and packaging and basically building an application and managing its dependencies.
So you could create a WebAssembly version of your application to be deployed like this.
But yeah, so I think one of the Pyodide main creator or maintainer went to Anaconda.
They created PyScript, which is another attempt to make it even easier to use Python to create web applications, interactive web applications.
And yeah, so there's so many cool things here.
Like in the R community, they have WebR, which is similar to PyScript and Pyodide in some ways, like compiling the whole R stack to WebAssembly.
There was just an article I saw on Hacker News where they worked on figuring out how to trick LLVM into compiling Fortran code, like legacy Fortran code, to WebAssembly.
Because when you're talking about all of this scientific computing stack, you need the linear algebra and all of the 40 years of Fortran code that have been built to support scientific applications.
You need all that to compile to and run in the browser.
yeah that's pretty wild to think of putting that in there but very useful i didn't realize that
you could use duck db as a WebAssembly component that's pretty cool yeah like there's there's a
company uh i'm not an investor or plugging them or anything but it's called evidence.dev and they
they uh it's like a whole beat like business intelligence um open source business intelligence
application that's uh powered by powered by db and so uh if you have data that that fits in the
if it's in the browser, you know, to have a whole like interactive dashboard or to be able to do
business intelligence, like fully, like fully in the browser with no need of a, no need of a server.
It's, yeah, it's, it's, it's, it's very, very cool. So I'm, yeah, I've, I've been following DuckDB
since the early days and, you know, my company Voltron Data, like, you know, we, we became
members of the DuckDB Foundation and actively build a relationship with DuckDB Labs so we could
help accelerate progress in this space because I think the impact is so immense.
And it's hard to predict what people are going to build with all this stuff.
And so that was all, I guess, going back 15 years ago to Python, one of the reasons I became so
passionate about building stuff for Python was about in I think the way that Peter Wang puts
that it puts it as you know giving people superpowers so we want to enable people to
build things with much less code and much less time and so by making it things that much more
accessible that much easier to do like in the mantra in pandas was like how do we make things
you know one line of code or like this that must be easy it's like one line of code one line of
code it must be like make this as terse and simple as possible so that you can move on and
focus on building the more interesting parts of your application rather than struggling with how
to read a csv file or you know how to do you know whichever whichever you know data munging
technique that you need for your for your data set maybe an interesting mental model for duckdb
of an equivalent to sqlite but more analytics database for folks you know in process yeah
things right what do you think yeah so yeah duckdb is like sqlite and in fact it can run the whole
sqlite test suite i believe so it's a full database but it's uh it's uh um it's for analytic
processing so it's optimized for for analytic processing and uh as compared you know with
SQLite, which is not, it's not designed for data processing.
Yeah.
Cool.
All right.
Well, let's talk about some things that you're working on beyond Pandas.
You talked about Apache Arrow earlier.
What are you doing with Arrow and how does it fit in your world?
Yeah.
So the backstory there was, I don't know if you can hear the sirens in downtown Nashville,
but.
No, actually, it's good.
It's filled the microphone filters it out, filters it out pretty well.
Yay for dynamic microphones.
They're amazing.
Yeah.
So in like around the mid, like the mid 2010s, 2015, I started working.
I started working at Cloudera, like in the, which is a company that was like one of the
pioneers in the big data ecosystem.
And, yeah, I had, you know, been spent several years working on five, five years,
five, six years working on pandas.
And so I had gone through the experience of building pandas from top to bottom.
And it was this, you know, full stack, system that had, had its own, you know, mini
query engine, all of its own algorithms and data structures and all this stuff that we
had to build from, build from scratch.
And I started thinking about, you know, what if it was possible to build some of the underlying computing technology, like data readers, like file readers, all the algorithms that power the core components of Pandas, like group operations, aggregations, filtering, selection, all those things.
Like what if it were possible to have a general purpose library that isn't specific to Python, but is really, really fast, really efficient, and has a large community building it so that you could, you know, take that code with you and use it to build many different types of libraries, not just data frame libraries, but also database engines and, you know, stream processing engines and all kinds of things.
And so that was kind of what was in my mind when I started getting interested in what turned into Arrow.
And one of the problems we realized we needed to solve, this was like a group of other open source developers and me,
was that we needed to create a way to represent data that was not tied to a specific programming language
and that could be used for a very efficient interchange between components.
And the idea is that you would have this immutable, like this kind of constant data structure, which is like it's the same in every programming language.
And then you can use that as the basis for writing all of your algorithms.
So as long as it's Arrow, you have these reusable algorithms that process Arrow data.
So we started with building the Aero format and standardizing it. And then we built a whole ecosystem of components, like library components and different programming languages for building applications that use the Aero format.
So that includes, you know, not only tools for building and interacting with the data, but also file readers.
So you can read CSV files and JSON data and Parquet files, read data out of database systems.
You know, wherever the data comes from, we want to have an efficient way to get it into the Arrow format.
And then we moved on to building data processing engines that are native to the Arrow format so that Arrow goes in, the data is processed, Arrow goes out.
So DuckDB, for example, supports Arrow as a preferred input format.
And DuckDB is more or less Arrow-like in its internals.
It has kind of Arrow format plus a number of extensions that are DuckDB specific for better performance within the context of DuckDB.
And so in numerous communities, so there's the Rust community, which has built Data Fusion, which is an execution engine for Arrow.
SQL engine for Arrow. And so, yeah, we've kind of like looked at the different layers of the stack, like data access, computing, data transport, you know, everything under the sun.
And then we've built libraries that are across many different programming languages that you can pick and choose the pieces that you need to build your system.
And the goal ultimately was that we, in the future, which is now, we don't want people to have to reinvent the wheel whenever they're building something like Pandas, that they could just pick up these off-the-shelf components.
They can design the developer experience, the user experience that they want to create.
And they can get built.
So if you were building Pandas now, you could build a Pandas-like library based on the arrow components in much less time.
and it would be fast and efficient and interoperable
with the whole ecosystem of other projects that use Arrow.
So it's very cool.
I mean, it was really ambitious,
in some ways obvious to people.
They would hear about Arrow and they'd say,
that sounds obvious.
Like, clearly we should have a universal way
of transporting data between systems
and processing it in memory.
Why hasn't this been done in the past?
And it turns out that, as is true,
many open source software problems that many of these problems are, the social problems are harder
than the technical problems. And so if you can solve the kind of people coordination and consensus
problems, solving the technical issues is much, much easier by comparison. So I think we were
lucky in that we found like the right, you know, the right group of people, the right personalities
where we were able to, you know, as soon as I met, I met Jacques Nadeau, who had been at MapR and
we was working on his startup Dremio. Like I knew instantly when I met Jacques Nadeau, I was like,
it's like, I can work. He's like, it's like him, like, he's going to help me make this happen.
I met Julian Ledem, who had also co-created Parquet. I was like, yes, like we are going to make this
like, like we, like I found the right people, like we are, we are going to make this happen.
So it's been a labor of love and much work and stress and everything.
But I've been working on things circling with Arrow as the sun.
I've been building kind of satellites and moons and planets circling the Arrow sun over the last eight years or so.
And that's kept me pretty busy.
Yeah, it's only getting more exciting and interesting.
Over here, it says it uses efficient analytic operations on modern hardware like CPUs and GPUs.
One of the big challenges of Python has been the GIL.
Also, one of its big benefits, but one of its challenges when you get to multicore computational stuff has been the GIL.
What's the story here?
Yeah.
So in Arrowland, when we're talking about analytic efficiency, it mainly has to do with the underlying how a modern CPU works or how a GPU works.
And so when the data is arranged in column-oriented format, that enables the data to be moved efficiently through the CPU cache pipelines.
So the data is made available efficiently to the CPU cores.
And so we spent a lot of energy in Arrow making decisions, firstly, to enable very CPU cache or GPU cache efficient analytics on the data.
And so we were kind of always, when we were deciding, we would break ties and make decisions based on what's going to be more efficient for the computer chip.
The other thing is that modern, and this is true with GPUs, which have a different parallelism model or a different kind of multicore parallelism model than CPUs.
But in CPUs, they've focused on adding what are called single instruction multiple data intrinsic, like built-in operations in the processor, where now you can process up to 512 bytes of data in a single CPU instruction.
And so that's like, you know, my brain's doing the math right, like 16 32-bit floats or, you know, 8 64-bit integers in a single cycle.
There's like intrinsic operations.
Instead of multiply this number by that one,
multiply that number to these eight things all at once,
something like that.
That's right, yeah.
Or you might say like, oh, I have a bit mask
and I want to select, I want to gather like the one bits
that are set in this, you know, this bit mask
from this array of integers.
And so there's like a gather instruction,
which allows you to select a subset,
a sort of SIMD vector of integers, you know, using a bit mask. And so that, you know, turns out to be
like a pretty, you know, pretty critical operation in certain data analytic workloads. So yeah, we
were really, you know, we wanted to have a data format that was essentially, you know, future-proofed
in the sense that it's ideal for the coming wave, like current generation of CPUs, but also
So given that a lot of processing is moving to GPUs and to FPGAs and to custom silicon,
we wanted Arrow to be usable there as well.
And Arrow has been successfully used as the foundation of GPU computing libraries.
Like we, you know, kind of at Voltron Data, we built a whole accelerator native, GPU native,
scalable execution engine that's aero-based.
And so I think the fact that that was our aspiration
and we've been able to prove that out
in real-world workloads
and show the kinds of efficiency gains
that you can get with using modern computing hardware
correctly, or at least as well as it's intended to be used.
That's a big deal in terms of making applications faster,
reducing the carbon footprint of large-scale data workloads,
things like that.
yeah amazing all right let's see what else have i got on deck here to talk to you about uh let's
yeah maybe we can talk about we got a little time left we got a yeah we can talk about this um
yeah we could we could probably spend another hour talking yes easy i think uh i think one of the
more interesting areas in in recent years has been um new data frame libraries and data frame apis
that transpile or compile to different,
execute on different backends.
And so around the time that I was helping start Arrow,
I created this project called IBIS,
which is basically a portable data frame API
that knows how to generate SQL queries
and compile to pandas and Polars
and different data frame backends.
And the goal is to provide
a really productive data frame API
that gives you portability across different execution backends
with the goal of enabling what we call the multi-engine data stack.
So you aren't stuck with using one particular system
because all of the code that you've written is specialized to that system.
You have this tool, so maybe you could work with DuckDB on your laptop
or Pandas or Polars with IBIS on your laptop.
But if you need to run that workload someplace else,
maybe with ClickHouse or BigQuery,
Or maybe it's a large, big data workload that's too big to fit on your laptop and you need to use Spark SQL or something that you can just ask IBIS, say, hey, I want to do the same thing on this larger data set over here.
And it has all the logic to generate the correct query representation and run that workload for you.
So it's super useful.
But there's a whole wave of work right now to help enable people to work in a Pandas-like way, but work with big data or get better performance than Pandas.
Because Pandas is a Swiss Army knife, but isn't a chainsaw.
So if you were rebuilding Pandas from scratch, it would end up a lot.
There's areas of the project that are more bloated or have performance overhead that's hard to get rid of.
And so that's why you have, you know, Richie Fink started the Polars project, which is kind of a reimagining of Pandas data frames written in Rust and exposed in Python.
And Polars, of course, is built on Apache Arrow at its core.
So, you know, building an Arrow native data frame library in Rust and, you know, all the benefits that come with, you know, building Python extensions in Rust.
you avoid the GIL and you can manage the multi-threading in a systems language, all that
fun stuff. Yeah, when you're talking about Arrow and supporting
different ways of using it and things being built on it, it's certainly Polars
keeping in mind for me. When you talk about IBIS, I think it's
interesting that a lot of these data frame
libraries, they try to base their API to be
pandas-like, but not identical potentially, thinking of Dask
and others, but this IBIS sort of has the ability to configure it and extend it and
make it different, kind of like, for example, Dask, which is one of the backends here.
Yeah.
It does, but the API doesn't change, right?
It just, it talks to the different backends.
Yeah, there's different schools of thought on this.
So there's another project called Modin, which is similar to IBIS in many ways in the sense
of like transpilation and sort of dynamically supporting different backends, but sought to
closely emulate the exact details of like the API call, the function name, our function arguments
must be exactly the same as pandas with the goal of being a drop-in replacement for people's
pandas code. And that's one approach, kind of the pandas emulation route. And there's a library
called koalas for for spark which is like a pi spark uh emulation layer for the pandas api
and then there's other projects like polars and ibis and das data frame that uh take like design
cues from pandas in the sense of like the general way in which the api works but this may
meaningful departures in the interest of um doing things better in many ways than than than pandas
did in certain parts of the parts of the api um and making things simpler and not being beholden
like beholden to decisions that were made in pandas you know 15 years ago not to say there's
anything bad about the pandas api but like with any api it's large like it's it's it's very large
as evidenced by you know the 2000 page pages of documentation and so um i i understand the the
desire to make things simpler while also refining certain things making certain types of workloads
easier to express.
And so Polars, for example, is very expression-based.
And so everything is column expressions
and is lazy and not eagerly computed,
whereas Pandas is eager execution,
just like NumPy is,
which is how Pandas became eagerly executed
in the first place.
And so I think the mantra with Polars was
we don't want to support the eager execution by default
that pandas provides we want to be able to build expressions so that we can do query optimization
and take inefficient code and under the hood rewrite it to you know be more efficient uh which
is you know what you can do with a query optimizer um and so ultimately like and that that matters a
lot when you're executing code remotely or in like a big data system um that you you want to have the
freedom to be able to take like a lazy you know analytic expression and rewrite it you know based
on it might be like you need to seriously rewrite the expression in the case of like
dask for example like dask has to do um planning across a distributed cluster um and so you know
dask data frame is very pandas like but it also includes some explicit details of being able to
control how the data is partitioned and being able to have some knobs to turn in terms of like
having more control over what's happening on a distributed cluster and i think the goal there
is like to give the developer more control
as opposed to like trying to be intelligent,
you know, make all of the decisions
on behalf of the developer.
So if you, you know, if you know about how,
you know, know a lot about your data set,
then you can make more,
you can make, you know, decisions
about how to schedule and execute it.
Of course, Dask is building, you know,
query optimization to start making
more of those decisions on behalf of the user.
But, you know, Dask has become very popular
and impactful in making distributed computing easier in Python.
So they've gotten, you know, I think, gotten a long way without turning into a database.
And I think Dask never aspired to be a database engine, which is a lot of distributed computing
is, you know, not database-like.
It could be distributed array computing or distributed model training and just being
able to easily run distributed, you know, Python functions on a cluster and do distributed
computing that way.
It was amazing how many people were using PySpark in the early days just for the convenience of being able to run Python functions in parallel on a cluster.
Yeah, and that's pretty interesting.
Not exactly what it's designed for.
Right.
With Dask, you probably come across situations where you do a sequence of operations.
They're kind of commutative in the end and practice, but from a computational perspective, like how do I distribute this amongst different servers?
maybe one order matters a lot more than the other
from a performance, you know?
- Yeah.
Interesting.
All right, one final thing, SQLglot.
- Yeah, so SQLglot project started by Toby Mao.
So he's a Netflix alum and really talented,
talented developer who's created this
SQL query transpilation framework library for Python and kind of underlying core library.
And so the problem that's being solved there is that SQL, despite being a quote unquote standard,
is not at all standardized across different database systems.
And so if you want to take your SQL queries written for one engine and use them someplace else,
without something like SQL Glot, you would have to manually rewrite and make sure you get the
typecasting and coalescing rules correct. And so SQLglot has, understands the intricacies and the
quirks of every database dialect, SQL dialect, and knows how to correctly translate from one
dialect to another. And so IBIS now uses SQLglot as its underlying engine for query transpilation
and generating SQL outputs.
So originally, Ibis had its own kind of bad version of SQLglot,
kind of a query like SQL transpilation
that was powered by SQLAlchemy and a bunch of custom code.
And so I think they've been able to delete a lot of Ibis
by moving to SQLglot.
And I know that SQLglot is also being used
to power kind of a new, yeah, being used in people building new products that are Python powered,
things like that. So, and Toby, like his company, Tobiko Data, they're building a product called
SQL Mesh that's powered by SQL Glot. So very cool project and maybe a bit in the weeds,
but if you've ever needed to convert a SQL query from one dialect to another, it's, yeah,
SQL got us here to save the day.
I would say, you know, even simple things is how do you specify a parameter variable, you know, for a parameterized query, right?
And Microsoft SQL Server, it's like at the parameter name and Oracle, it's like question mark or SQL I think it's also, you know, just that.
Oh, it's a pain.
It's a pain, yeah.
And without it, you end up with little Bobby tables, which is also not good, so.
That's true.
Nobody wants to talk to him.
Yeah, this is really cool.
SQL glot, like polyglot, but all the languages of SQL.
Nice.
And you do things like, you can say,
read DuckDB and write to Hive,
or read DuckDB and then write to Spark,
or whatever.
That's pretty cool.
Yeah.
All right, Wes.
I think we're getting short on time,
but I know everybody appreciated hearing from you
and hearing what you're up to these days.
Anything you want to add before we wrap up?
I don't think so.
Yeah, I enjoyed the conversation.
And yeah, there's a lot of stuff going on
and still plenty of things to get excited about.
So I think often people feel like
all the exciting problems in the Python ecosystem
have been solved,
but there's still a lot to do.
And yeah, we've made a lot of progress
in the last 15 plus years.
But in some ways,
it feels like we're just getting started.
So we're excited to see where things go next.
Yeah, every time I think all the problems are solved,
then you discover all these new things
that are so creative.
And you're like, oh, that was a big problem.
I didn't even know it was a problem.
It's great.
Yeah, well, all right.
Thank you for being here and taking the time.
yeah keep us updated on what you're up to sounds good all right thanks for joining us yeah bye